chore: Add best practices on use of panics in the DSM (#2961)
dfinity/ic: rs/replicated_state/best-practices-panics.md

# Best Practices: Using panics in the Deterministic State Machine

## Scope of the document

> The scope of this document is to provide guidance on how/when to use panics in the Deterministic State Machine (DSM). Using such panics can potentially stall the DSM so they should only be reserved for cases where it’s really necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scope of this document is to provide guidance on how/when to use panics in the Deterministic State Machine (DSM). Such panics are very likely to get the DSM into a crash loop, so they should only be reserved for cases where this is the only correct behavior.
```

- An invariant is broken which could lead to corrupted state or state divergence or some otherwise broken state that is difficult to recover from. In that case a panic should be preferred to avoid creating further more difficult to resolve issues. A good example of this would be the case where we handle [reserved cycles](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/dfinity/ic@d7cac19658a397f862f9e162c32ac02d21a3d77d/-/blob/rs/system_api/src/sandbox_safe_system_state.rs?L514) in the system API.
- Hard invariants as defined above can result in panics when they get violated.

## When should panics be avoided

In some cases it’s best to avoid panics and instead either try to handle the errors or raise critical errors instead if it’s not easy to handle the error in place. debug_asserts are also highly encouraged for these cases.

- Wrong user input should never result in a replica panic.

> - Invariants across components are very hard to maintain and keep up to date as code evolves. Avoid adding panics related to such invariants and instead use critical errors instead to make the teams aware about instances where we might hit an unexpected case (some exceptions might apply if the invariant could lead to corrupted state or hard to recover from but it really should be the last resort). A good example here is [load_canister_snapshot](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/dfinity/ic@d7cac19658a397f862f9e162c32ac02d21a3d77d/-/blob/rs/execution_environment/src/canister_manager.rs?L2108-2126&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1733308984480434&usg=AOvVaw2K8SR6s3VMBOkSTryuhxga) where we check whether some scheduling precondition holds in the canister manager. In this case, using a panic would be very aggressive, stopping progress of the whole subnet for a bug related to canister snapshots. Returning an error back to the user and raising a critical error is the more appropriate handling of this case, containing the damage to some snapshots functionality only not working in case such a bug exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Invariants across components are very hard to maintain and keep up to date as code evolves. Avoid adding panics related to such invariants and use critical errors instead to make the teams aware about instances where we might hit an unexpected case (some exceptions might apply if the invariant could lead to corrupted state or be hard to recover from, but it really should be the last resort). A good example here is [load_canister_snapshot](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/dfinity/ic@d7cac19658a397f862f9e162c32ac02d21a3d77d/-/blob/rs/execution_environment/src/canister_manager.rs?L2108-2126&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1733308984480434&usg=AOvVaw2K8SR6s3VMBOkSTryuhxga) where we check whether some scheduling precondition holds in the canister manager. In this case, using a panic would be very aggressive, stopping progress of the whole subnet for a bug related to canister snapshots. Returning an error back to the user and raising a critical error is the more appropriate handling of this case, containing the damage to some snapshots functionality only not working in case such a bug exists.
```
